Add blog post on LLM (#36)
model-checking/kani-verifier-blog: _posts/2023-04-30-writing-code-with-llm-dont-forget-kani.md

---
layout: post

> title: "Writing Code with LLM? Don't Forget Kani"

Reviewer: option 1: LLMs for code? Don't forget Kani... 
option 2: Kani to the rescue
maybe others have more ideas.

Reviewer 2: Option - Writing Code with ChatGPT? Improve it with Kani.

Since we're strictly talking about ChatGPT and people are more familiar with ChatGPT as a term than LLMs. 

Don't forget Kani is a bit vague imo.

Reviewer 3: I totally agree with @jaisnan. People are way more familiar with ChatGPT.

---

Kani is a verification tool that can help you prove properties about your Rust code.
To learn more about Kani, check out [the Kani tutorial](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/kani-tutorial.html) and our [previous blog posts](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/).

Recently, ChatGPT---OpenAI’s AI chatbot built on top of large language models(LLM)---has taken the world by storm.
People use ChatGPT to write blog posts, do homework, and even write code!
That’s right---LLMs like ChatGPT can be used to write code, since code is essentially just another kind of text.
And with ChatGPT, all you need to do is provide a text prompt describing the program you want, and it will generate the code for you - along with an explanation of how it arrived at the solution.

We were also eager to explore the possibilities of using LLMs for daily coding tasks, so we decided to put ChatGPT to the test.

> In this blog post, we'll share our experiences with using ChatGPT and Kani to solve example coding problems, and explore how these technology could revolutionize the way we approach software development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we'll share our experiences with using ChatGPT and Kani to solve example coding problems, and explore how these technologies could revolutionize the way we approach software development.
```

The experiment we did include the following three tasks.

> 1. We write prompt and generate (unverified!) code with ChatGPT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. We write a prompt and generate code with ChatGPT.
```

> 2. We verify the generated code to see if they are correct with Kani.

Reviewer 4: "verify" and "to see if they are correct" are redundant. Perhaps say "We use Kani to check if the generated code is correct".

> 3. We use both ChatGPT and Kani to generate verified code.

Reviewer 4: This one is a bit vague. Maybe say, we iterate 1 and 2 until we generate verified code?

> Our result showed that, ChatGPT is easily to use and can efficient generate code from text description. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our results showed that, ChatGPT is easier to use and can efficiently generate code from text description. 
```

> Our result showed that, ChatGPT is easily to use and can efficient generate code from text description. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our experiments showed that, while ChatGPT is easy to use and can efficiently generate code from text description, the generated code is often unsound. This is where verification tools like Kani can help detect bugs, corner cases and unexpected behavior in the generated code, thereby helping users of ChatGPT write more proven code. 
```

> While the generated code is not always sound, program verifiers like Kani can effectively detect bugs in the generated code and help ChatGPT fix them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the generated code is not always sound, program verifiers like Kani can effectively detect bugs in the generated code and help ChatGPT fix them.
```

> While the generated code is not always sound, program verifiers like Kani can effectively detect bugs in the generated code and help ChatGPT fix them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Code Generation using ChatGPT
We demonstrate the three tasks with two examples.

> Let's start our first task: can we write code using prompt with ChatGPT?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start our first task: can we write code using a prompt with ChatGPT?
```

#### Example 1.a
The first example is a toy problem of writing a rust function to compute the average of two integers.
So the prompt is also very simple and straightforward.

```

> Q: Can you write me a rust function that compute the integer average of two integers?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Q: Can you write me a rust function that computes the integer average of two integers?
```

> Q: Can you write me a rust function that compute the integer average of two integers?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Q: Can you write me a Rust function that computes the integer average of two integers?
```

```

Giving the above prompt, ChatGPT answered us with the following function
```rust
fn integer_average(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32 {
    (a + b) / 2
}
```
, the explanation of the function
>In this function, we define a function called integer_average that takes two integer arguments a and b.
The function then adds the two arguments together and divides the result by 2 to compute the integer average.

> , and even a drive function to call the average function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
, and even a driver function to call the average function.
```

```rust
fn main() {
    let a = 4;
    let b = 8;
    let result = integer_average(a, b);
    println!("The average of {} and {} is {}", a, b, result);
}
```

> #### Example 2.a

Reviewer 5: Naming the examples in a different way (e.g., the "average example" and the "lowest unset bit example" if you want to focus on their purpose, or the "program writing example" and "optimization example" if you want to focus on the task) may help readers in remembering these examples later. But I'm not pushing too hard on this; I just think "2.a" or "1.b" is easy to forget.

The second example we tried is more like a real-world coding task.

> We wrote a rust function that compute the lowest unset bit in a `u32` integer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We wrote a rust function that computes the lowest unset bit in a `u32` integer.
```

> We wrote a rust function that compute the lowest unset bit in a `u32` integer.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
First, we wrote a rust function that compute the lowest unset bit in a `u32` integer.
```

> Our implementation uses a loop to iterate through all 32 bits in input.

Reviewer 5: "the" input?

And we know that this could be slower than using some [bit twiddling hacks](https://graphics.stanford.edu/~seander/bithacks.html).

> So, we want to optimize the function with ChatGPT.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In this case, our goal is to optimize the function with ChatGPT.
```

> The prompt we provided including the implementation we wrote.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This is the prompt we used, which includes the implementation we wrote:
```

> The prompt we provided including the implementation we wrote.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The prompt we provided included the implementation we wrote.
```

``` 
Q: Optimize this rust function:

> fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {

Reviewer 5: I can see why you may not want to use "quote text" for this...

> fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {

Author: Split this into two blocks may confuse readers whether they are in the same prompt. I would rather keep them in one text block, which also hints that ChatGPT takes text as input.

> fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {

Reviewer 3: It makes sense. It's just harder to read the code.

    let mut mask = 1;
    for i in 0..32 {
        if x & mask == 0 {
            return Some(i);
        }
        mask <<= 1;
    }
    None
} 
```

After a few seconds, ChatGPT gave us a solution
``` rust
fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {
    if x == std::u32::MAX{
        return None;
    }
    let y = x | (x + 1);
    let z = y ^ (y + 1);
    Some((z.trailing_zeros() % 32) as u8)
}
```

> with the explanation of it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the explanation for it.
```

> with the explanation of it.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
along with an explanation.
```

Reviewer 5: You don't include the explanation here? Might be appropriate since it's doing some bit magic.

Author: I took this example from @zhassan-aws 's video which doesn't show the full explanation.
@zhassan-aws Have you store the explanation of this answer? Or probably it can be found from the ChatGPT history.

> From these two examples, I must say, I'm thoroughly impressed with ChatGPT's code generation capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From these two examples, ChatGPT's code generation capabilities are thoroughly impressive.
```

> From these two examples, I must say, I'm thoroughly impressed with ChatGPT's code generation capabilities.

Reviewer 5: You've been using majestic "we" up to here, shouldn't switch to "I" now...

> From these two examples, I must say, I'm thoroughly impressed with ChatGPT's code generation capabilities.

Reviewer 3: You've been using "we" in the rest of the blog, maybe switch that to we as well?

Not only does it produce code that looks good at first glance, but it also provides explanations that give us greater confidence that the code is doing exactly what we intended it to do.
In fact, we can even request ChatGPT to generate a driver function and some test cases using follow-up prompts to further test the generated code.

> However, as a verification folk, we know that we still can't be completely sure that the code is correct without **verification**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, as verification folks, we know that we still can't be completely sure that the code is correct without **verification**.
```

> However, as a verification folk, we know that we still can't be completely sure that the code is correct without **verification**.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, as verification folks, we know that we still can't be completely sure that the code is correct without **verification**.
```
Or "verification experts"? I don't know.

> ## Verification of Generated Code

Reviewer 3: I think I prefer if you reorganize the blog a bit where you define and verify the first example, then move to the second example.

Author: Good idea. I will create a new section "A More Practical Example" and all about the second examples to the new section.

> So, naturally, our next task is: can we verify those generated code with Kani?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So, naturally, our next task is: can we verify the generated programs with Kani?
```

> So, naturally, our next task is: can we verify those generated code with Kani?

Reviewer 5: Again, this isn't the task, but the question.

> #### Example 1.b

Reviewer 3: These numbers are a bit confusing. I read that this is a different example than `1.a`. It almost read like a typo to me when I move to the next line.

> Continue following Example 1.a.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Continuing from Example 1.a.
```
?

> Thanks to the driver function, we can simply write a harness function for the generated code by substitute the test cases with `kani::any()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks to the driver function, we can simply write a harness function for the generated code by substituting the test cases with `kani::any()`.
```

> Thanks to the driver function, we can simply write a harness function for the generated code by substitute the test cases with `kani::any()`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We can simply transform the driver function into a harness by substituting the test cases with `kani::any()`.
```

``` rust
fn integer_average(a: i32, b: i32) -> i32 {
    (a + b) / 2     // <------ line 2
}

#[kani::proof]
fn main() {
    let a = kani::any();
    let b = kani::any();
    let result = integer_average(a, b);
    println!("The average of {} and {} is {}", a, b, result);
}
```

> This harness function verifies that for any `i32` integers `a` and `b`, the function `integer_average` does not have any bug that [Kani can spot](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/tutorial-kinds-of-failure.html).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This harness verifies that, for any `i32` integers `a` and `b`, the function `integer_average` does not have any bug that [Kani can spot](https://model-checking.github.io/kani/tutorial-kinds-of-failure.html).
```
Well done linking into the tutorial!

We ran Kani on the above program
```console
foo@bar:~$ kani integer_average.rs
```
and got the verification result
```console
...
SUMMARY:
 ** 1 of 4 failed
Failed Checks: attempt to add with overflow
 File: "...", line 2, in integer_average

VERIFICATION:- FAILED
Verification Time: 0.6991158s
```

The code is actually buggy! 
Although the average of two `i32` integers is in the range of `i32`, the intermediate sum `a + b` may overflow.

> A counterexample is when a equals to `i32::MAX` and `b` equals to any positive integer, the sum of them will be greater than `i32::MAX` and hence overflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A counterexample is when `a` equals `i32::MAX` and `b` equals any positive integer, the sum of them will be greater than `i32::MAX` and hence overflow.
```

> A counterexample is when a equals to `i32::MAX` and `b` equals to any positive integer, the sum of them will be greater than `i32::MAX` and hence overflow.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A counterexample is when `a` equals to `i32::MAX` and `b` equals to any positive integer, the sum of them will be greater than `i32::MAX`, and hence overflow.
```

#### Example 2.b
Demonstrating that one program is an optimization of another requires proving two things: that the programs are equivalent and that the optimized version performs better.
Although proving the performance improvement can be challenging, we can at least verify the equivalence of the two implementations using Kani. 

> We put the implementation we wrote and the implementation ChatGPT generated together and write a harness function for checking the equivalence of the implementation of lowest_unset_bit we provided and the implementation ChatGPT generated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We put the implementation we wrote and the implementation ChatGPT generated together and wrote a harness function for checking the equivalence of the implementation of `lowest_unset_bit` provided and the implementation ChatGPT generated.
```

> In the harness function, we let the input `x` be any `u32` integer, run both implementations on `x`, and check that the output of them are always equivalent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the harness function, we let the input `x` be any `u32` integer, run both implementations on `x`, and check that the output generated by them are always equivalent.
```

> In the harness function, we let the input `x` be any `u32` integer, run both implementations on `x`, and check that the output of them are always equivalent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the harness function, we let the input `x` be any `u32` integer, run both implementations on `x`, and check that the output is the same.
```

``` rust

> fn lowest_unset_bit_ori(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {

Reviewer 3: Maybe add a comment that this is the original non-optimized version

    let mut mask = 1;
    for i in 0..32 {
        if x & mask == 0 {
            return Some(i);
        }
        mask <<= 1;
    }
    None
} 

> fn lowest_unset_bit_opt(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {

Reviewer 3: same here... a comment might help

    if x == std::u32::MAX{
        return None;
    }
    let y = x | (x + 1);        // <------ line 16 
    let z = y ^ (y + 1);
    Some((z.trailing_zeros() % 32) as u8)
} 

#[kani::proof]
fn check() {
    let x: u32 = kani:any()
    assert_eq!(lowest_unset_bit_ori(x), lowest_unset_bit_opt(x));   // <------ line 24
}
```

Running Kani on the program with the command
```
> kani lowest_unset_bit.rs
```
gave us the verification result
```
...
SUMMARY:
 ** 2 of 70 failed
Failed Checks: attempt to add with overflow
 File: "...", line 16, in lowest_unset_bit_opt
Failed Checks: assertion failed: lowest_unset_bit_ori(x) == lowest_unset_bit_opt(x)
 File: "...", line 24, in check

VERIFICATION:- FAILED
Verification Time: 0.84979576s
```

The generated implementation is incorrect!
There were two failed checks.
The first one `Failed Checks: attempt to add with overflow` says that the addition `x + 1` may overflow.
The other one says that equivalent check may fail---the two implementations are actually not equivalent.

> To better understand the bug, we asked Kani to produce us a counterexample with the `--conrete-playback` command (discussed in [our previous blog](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/2022/09/22/internship-projects-2022-concrete-playback.html◊))

Reviewer 5: The link contains ◊ - what?

Author: Fixed.

> To better understand the bug, we asked Kani to produce us a counterexample with the `--conrete-playback` command (discussed in [our previous blog](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/2022/09/22/internship-projects-2022-concrete-playback.html◊))

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To better understand the bug, we asked Kani to produce a counterexample with the `--concrete-playback` option (discussed in [our previous post](https://model-checking.github.io/kani-verifier-blog/2022/09/22/internship-projects-2022-concrete-playback.html)).
```

```
> cargo kani --enable-unstable --concrete-playback=print | grep "//" | awk '{print $2}'
2147483647
```

> The counterexample is when x equals to `2147483647` (`i32::MAX`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The counterexample is when `x` equals to `2147483647` (`i32::MAX`).
```

> The counterexample is when x equals to `2147483647` (`i32::MAX`).

Reviewer 4: "`x` is equal to ..." or "`x` equals ..."

The examples above illustrate that, although code generation is efficient and accessible, it's crucial to exercise caution and avoid blindly trusting the generated code, as it may contain errors.

> We believe there are two factors contribute to this unreliability.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We believe there are two factors that contribute to this unreliability.
```

Firstly, the training corpus for most LLMs is unverified code.
Secondly, text prompts can be ambiguous, leading to the production of flawed code.
Fortunately, program verifiers such as Kani can provide valuable information about generated code, such as verification results, and counterexamples.
Armed with this information, developers can locate and fix bugs more effectively.
But what about the potential for language models like ChatGPT to leverage such insights to improve code generation accuracy?
It's an intriguing question that merits further exploration.

> ## Verified Code Generation with Verifiers in the Loop

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Code Generation with Verifiers in the Loop
```

The last task we explore in this blog is: can we combine Kani and ChatGPT to generate correct and verified code?

#### Example 1.c
Continue following Example 1.b.

> Recall that we found the overflow error of the expression `a + b` in the generated code with Kani.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Recall that we found the overflow error in the expression `a + b` in the generated code with Kani.
```

We shared this information with ChatGPT.
```
Q: The expression (a + b) / 2 may overflow.
```

> ChatGPT agreed with us and fix the overflow with a new implementation using `checked_add`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
ChatGPT agreed with us and fixed the overflow with a new implementation using `checked_add`:
```

``` rust
fn integer_average(num1: i32, num2: i32) -> i32 {
    match num1.checked_add(num2) {
        Some(sum) => sum / 2,
        None => {
            // Handle overflow gracefully
            println!("Overflow occurred!");
            std::i32::MAX // Fallback value
        }
    }
}
```

We reran Kani on this new implementation.
Kani verified that this new version is correct!

> However, the function become no longer complete that computes the average for all i32 integers as we expected.

Reviewer 5: Are these two separate sentences?

For example, it does not compute the average for the input `integer_average(std::i32::MAX, 1)`.
So, we tried again with the following prompt to generate a complete version of `integer_average`.
```
Q: Can you give me a fix that does not throw any error?
```
This time, ChatGPT find us an implementation that can also be verified by Kani, and accept all i32 integers as input.
```

> fn integer_average(num1: i32, num2: i32) -> i32 {

Reviewer 3: Maybe close the loop by running Kani once again and show that the verification succeeds.

    num1 / 2 + num2 / 2 + (num1 % 2 + num2 % 2) / 2
}
```

#### Example 2.c

> Recall that we get a counterexample `x: 2147483647` from Kani for the equivalence check of `lowest_unset_bit`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Recall that we got a counterexample `x = 2147483647` from Kani for the equivalence check of `lowest_unset_bit`.
```
?

> We reported this counterexample to ChatGPT and ask it to give a fix.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We reported this counterexample to ChatGPT and asked for a fix.
```

```
Q: The optimized version does not produce the same value as the original for x = 2147483674.
```
It gave as a new optimization.
``` rust
fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {
    if x == std::u32::MAX{
        return None;
    }
    Some((x ^ (x + 1)).trailing_zeros() as u8)
} 
```
We ran Kani to check if the new version is equivalent to the original implementation with the same harness function.
This time, there was only one failed check.
```
...
SUMMARY:
 ** 1 of 70 failed
Failed Checks: assertion failed: lowest_unset_bit_ori(x) == lowest_unset_bit_opt(x)
 File: "...", line 22, in check

VERIFICATION:- FAILED
Verification Time: 0.84979576s
```

> The overflow has been fixed but the equivalence failure persist. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The overflow has been fixed, but the equivalence failure persists.
```

> The overflow has been fixed but the equivalence failure persist. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The overflow has been fixed, but the equivalence failure persists. 
```

> Similarly, we produced another counterexample `x: 4293918719` with Kani, reported it to ChatGPT, and got another optimization.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similarly, we produced another counterexample `x = 4293918719` with Kani, reported it to ChatGPT, and got another optimization.
```

``` rust
fn lowest_unset_bit(x: u32) -> Option<u8> {
    if x == std::u32::MAX{
        return None;
    }
    let y = !x;
    Some(y.trailing_zeros() as u8)
} 
```

> Kani successfully verified that this optimization is equivalent with the original implementation.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kani successfully verified that this optimization is equivalent to the original implementation.
```
?

> Kani successfully verified that this optimization is equivalent with the original implementation.

Reviewer 3: I would add Kani's output saying that the verification suceeded

> The Kani proof save us from spending a lot of time to understand the bit hack and to convince ourself that the two implementations are equivalent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Kani proof saved us from spending a lot of time understanding the bit hack and from convincing ourselves that the two implementations are equivalent.
```

> The Kani proof save us from spending a lot of time to understand the bit hack and to convince ourself that the two implementations are equivalent.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Kani proof saves us from spending a lot of time to understand the bit hack and to convince ourselves that the two implementations are equivalent.
```

## Summary

> In this post, we show how to generate codes with ChatGPT, how to verify generated code with Kani, and how to generate verified code with both ChatGPT and Kani.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post, we showed how to generate programs with ChatGPT, how to verify generated code with Kani, and how to generate verified code with both ChatGPT and Kani.
```

With increasingly powerful code generation capabilities, software development is becoming more automated and accessible.

> However, as developers spend less time on implementation details, corner cases, and safety issues, the code becomes more susceptible to errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, as developers spend less time on implementation details, corner cases, and safety issues, their code becomes more susceptible to errors.
```

> In this context, specifications may become more critical than ever, serving as the new ground truth in cases where developers no longer write code line by line.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, specifications may become more critical than ever, serving as the new ground truth in cases where developers no longer write code line by line.
```
